.. Wind power prediction documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Tue Mar  3 09:04:56 2020.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.


Wind Power Production Volume Prediction
=======================================

This is the documentation for the deep learning based model that was developed during this thesis. The source code is available at https://github.com/kapteinstein/wind-power-prediction. Please use this documentation as a reference when exploring the source code. Note that the results in the thesis are not reproducable without the dataset. The dataset is belongs to the company Refinitiv and is not public available.

The aim of this thesis was to predict the wind power production volume of a large geographical region given the Numerical Weather Prediction data (NWP) over the region using deep learning. Good production predictions is important for power grid balancing, production planning, and price estimation. Having an accurate forecast for the upcoming wind power production volume has become more and more important in the past years due to the fast increasing number of installed wind turbines and installed total production capacity. Due to the physical properties of wind turbines wind power production has a strong correlation with the current weather system. This motivates a thorough analysis of the weather using the past, current and upcoming weather as a basis for the volume prediction.  However, the highly non-linearity of the spatial and temporal characteristics of the weather system makes accurate power volume predictions difficult. To address this, this study creates and investigates a deep learning architecture using techniques that have shown great success on other similar problems. Convolutional Neural Networks, CNNs, have had great success in image classification, and are able to extract spatial relations and information. An extension to CNNs, called 3D convolution, has had success in capturing temporal dependencies in sequences of image-like data. This study found that deep learning methods were able to directly predict the wind power production volume more accurately than other common machine learning methods (LightGBM, Random Forest, kNN, and AdaBoost) in 13 out of 20 regions. A hybrid model constructed using a tree-based learning algorithm, LightGBM, trained on a combination of NWP and features generated by the CNN, improved the prediction accuracy in 17 out of 20 regions compared to the LightGBM algorithm trained without these additional features. Future research in applying deep learning to wind power analysis is encouraged to further investigate the possibilities of capturing the spatio-temporal dependencies to improve predictions.


*Erik Liodden*

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Contents:

   model
   network
   database
   dataset
   convert-dataset
   run-parameters

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
